Welcome back.
Let's talk about databases but I'm going to give you a heads up as a web developer you might not actually
work too much with databases especially when it comes to scaling and improving their performance.
However we can take a look at databases from a higher level so that we can connect the pieces.
And if it ever comes down to it we can structure our applications so that it takes advantage of however
the database is set up.
So let's take a high level overview of what we can do with databases.
I have listed here six items that are the main ways that databases can scale and the very first one
is probably the most important one that you should look at before you do any sort of optimizations on
a database.
And that is to identify inefficient queries before you start looking at your data base and how you can
scale it.
Throwing more money to improve it.
You first have to ask yourself Am I using the database efficiently.
Am I making statements to the database from my let's say API server Am I making these requests in an
efficient way possible.
And there's many ways that you can improve that not having too many joints or asking for too much information
when you only need a little bit of information.
There's many ways that you can improve your ask you all queries but the two main things that you can
improve on is making sure that you only request where you absolutely need on your server.
And then finally using things like indexes to improve this querying of data.
Now what are indexes.
Well usually data access in a database is done with blocks on disks.
That is when we query a database or a table we have to ask access that entire disk block with that information
of the table.
And usually this data.
Let's say I have a user name and age is not sorted.
So if I was searching for a user that is 34 years old.
Well that's going to require me to look through the entire table whereas if that data was sorted I could
do something called binary search which makes it a lot faster for me to find that user.
So there's a huge performance increase by doing what we call indexing.
So keep that in mind indexing is a way of sorting a number of records on multiple fields.
So if I create an index on a field that is age of the users table it creates a new copy of that data
structure which holds the field value and a pointer to the record that it relates to.
So think of it as creating a file on your computer instead of having just the user stable file.
Now you also have a user's index file.
But next time we query any user age questions we can just use that index file to immediately find that
user allowing us to use binary searches.
Again to really increase performance.
Now the obvious downside to indexing is that these indexes require additional space on disk.
Again we're making another file and depending on your system having more and more space might especially
if the database is large might not work well.
All right.
So all this index talk and inefficient queries.
How can I actually create an index.
Well remember our skew all statements to create a table we did the create table command and then we
gave it the table name to create an index.
We simply say create index reaking have an index name.
Let's say use your age on the table name.
In our case user and the column name age and that's it.
After we do that any time we query our users table for something like H we have WAY faster query again
when it comes to efficient Eskew or commands that's something that usually you have a database team
or database engineers for.
But creating simple things like indexes or making sure that you're only requesting what you require
from the application is the way to do it.
Remember storage is the slowest piece in a relational database.
Wombat Escorial Querrey can cause a huge amount of delay or so the next topic is increasing memory.
And this is a nice simple one.
If you have a bottleneck that is your storage your first course of action usually after you've looked
at inefficient queries is to give it additional memory and you do that by improving the hardware that
the database is working on.
By increasing the amount of information in memory you aren't accessing the disk as often as you increase
your speed so that you can store more information in memory for a database.
But as with anything with when it comes to memory it can only add a certain amount.
You won't be able to add the entire database in memory.
Let's talk about the next one.
And that is vertical scaling.
And this is usually done with something like red S or memcached and rattus is something that we're familiar
with and we've talked about vertical scaling can also include increasing memory.
But in this case we're talking about adding another service so that your system effectively uses the
resources better.
So adding a system like rentes is kind of like adding memory but not doing it on the same server as
we would have in the first case.
So by adding another server that has read us that is a memory storage which again we know that makes
things fast means that we've just increased the memory of our database.
But how does that help us.
Well for example if we ask a query like a user's age and we keep noticing that this query of asking
for the user's age always happens and every user uses it well we can actually cash in cash that response
again something that we'll talk about but will say hey before you even ask me about the uses age check
read us which is in memory is a lot faster than I am.
Check if Mr. rattus or Mrs. rentes has that information.
If it does well just return it.
Otherwise pass that information on to me and I'll give it back to you.
But when I return them user age I'm actually going to go through rattus and if rattus doesn't have it
already I'm just going to store it there before I send it over.
So it's kind of similar to Cdn if you think about it.
Again we're just cashing things that are often requested so that we use memory access instead of disk
access.
Another option for database's is something called Shardik and I want to warn you shirting is one of
those things that sounds like it makes sense but it's extremely hard to do.
And it's a very tough problem.
That raises a lot of issues that you're most likely won't ever implement yourself by shorting as this
animation just demonstrated is simply breaking down the Web site in into different pieces.
When you start having more and more stores in the database it gets too big to handle.
So you break up the data maybe by users having that are younger than 30 and users that are older than
30 so that when you make a query instead of searching through that entire list of users if we know the
user is 23 we can just request to query this database instead of this one.
Another thing we can do is adding more databases to the problem.
So by having multiple databases we can simply have more options here.
If a thousand users are requesting user information at the same time instead of giving a thousand request
to this database at the same time why not give 300 333 requests to this one.
Then 333 to this one and 334 to this one and distribute the load.
And this is something that databases like postscripts can come preconfigured with so that if you add
more database pools or postscripts pools it does this automatically for you.
Or we can place your own load balancer in front of it to distribute this load.
Again low balancers are something that will cover in the section and then finally we have database types
a database can do only so much.
Each database is good at its specific thing but some databases are suited for one thing and others are
suited for another.
So when picking databases you have to decide what type of characteristics or behaviors do we want to
out of the database.
And based on that you have to make sure you're picking the right one.
And this is something that is really going to hurt your head because there are a ton of databases out
there because there are so many ways to store data and some of these names may sound familiar to you.
We know about relational storage.
We've looked at postscripts before you might have heard of Majeski well and then there's documents or
storage that is part of no rescue all or non relational databases.
We've learned about rattus and the key values store but there's also things like Graph databases and
you know for Jei or big tables and the list just goes on and on and on.
Again don't let this overwhelm you.
Most of these you're never going to touch in your career.
You just want to know what the differences are what the major players are like postscripts in my ask
you all Mongo D-B rattus but know that they're available that when you have a specific problem when
you're creating perhaps a social network app maybe looking at graph databases which are really really
good for storing graph data which is great for social connections.
So when it comes to databases there are a lot of things to do but just keep in mind the six principles
of how we can improve database scaling.
I'll see in the next one.